# Screenshot 2025-08-28 190438.png

Choosing the right machine learning or statistical model for financial applications is often a trial-and-error process, requiring deep domain knowledge and ML expertise. With the rise of diverse model types from
Bayesian inference to LLMs financial analysts, traders, and developers face an overwhelming choice. This leads to misuse of models, wasted resources, or missed opportunities. This project aims to bridge that gap by
classifying and advising on model selection using an intelligent, interactive system, empowering even non-experts to make high-quality data-driven decisions.

: Financial tasks have unique demands like uncertainty management, explainability, data type variety,

and regulatory constraints that current frameworks don't fully address, there is a demand for customized,
structured framework that matches finance-specific use cases (e.g., forecasting, portfolio optimization)

with optimal modeling methods complete with explanations and code delivering tailored advice where it's most
needed.

1. Absence of monitoring tool for LLMs Evolution

Current tools lack systematic, statistical capabilities to effectively track and analyze trends and advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs), especially within financial contexts. Although classification of LLMs

exists, there is a significant gap in systematically identifying emerging trends such as the rise of retrieval-augmented models, sparse LLMs, or specialized financial models like BlogmbergGPT. and FinGPT, resulting in
missed strategic insights for investment and research teams.

https://nexustrade.io/blog/its-hard-as-fuck-to-use-Ilms-for-financial-research-i-did-itanyways-20241114
https://www.reddit.com/r/ChatGPTPromptGenius/comments/1griésv/its hard_as fuck to_use Ilms for financial/

+ Data Preprocessing (Understanding and Preparation)
Data Generation (fully synthetic, partially synthetic, hybrid synthetic)
Al Methods and their application in finance.
. Supervised/ Unsupervised Statistical learning
. Linear Regression
. Logistic Linear Regression
Multiple Linear Regression ( including variable selection, eg forward, backward, mixed)
. Assessment of Model fit - Hypothesis Testing
e. Prediction/Forecasting
f. Extension Methods such as Qualitative Predictors, Interaction Terms, Polynomial Regression, and error analysis with residual plots.
g. Penalised Regression including Ridge, LASSO and Elastic Net and Cross Validation
h. Bias-Variance Trade off concept

o

anoo

Industry Background and Publications
Key publications

. https://github.com/Hannibal046/Awesome-LLM - They have attempted to list all Al models & techniques
. https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14710 -Challenges associated with using PTMs
