# Screenshot 2025-08-28 191612.png

the research motivation behind this idea is that with the fast progress of LLMs there is an absence of a monitoring tool for their evolution so there is no way to quantify or visualise that especially in finance specific
context. This is making it difficult for professionals to identify relevant trends or select suitable models. The second thing is that there is a critical knowledge gap between financial experts and LLM technologies so
most finance professionals lack awareness of how current models perform, evolve, or align with use-case-specific demands.

Honestly in other words financial analysts have now a very heavy duty to deeply understand, evaluate, and research LLMs, including which types to use. In the near future hedge funds and financial institutes are gonna.
be deploying these LLMS heavily so analysts must navigate complex decisions around model selection and implementation from now. However, many struggle to experiment with these models because they face
major challenges in understanding how they work and which ones perform best (i.e. are the best suited for a task specific application they’are trying to execute) due to their complex technical nature, and over use of
technical jargon. This is where our solution comes in. We propose a tool designed to simplify this process and empower not only financial analysts, but also smaller or early-stage businesses that lack the bugdets for
expensive LLM experts. So they would be able to adopt these technologies with our help in a reliable, and cost-effective way.

So what this project proposes is to build an intelligence platform that tracks new LLMs, recommends optimal models for financial tasks, and explains complex techniques in plain language - all in one unified system.
So, obviosly there is a lot of opportuntity here to build a smart, scalable product that can be widely adopted in the financial sector and potentially be integrated into core financial infrastructure.
